

===== PAGE 1 =====
Closing the Data Loop: Real-World AUVs Adaptive
Sampling for Improved Ocean Model Predictions
Lucrezia Bernacchi 1, Ana Filipa Duarte 2, Renato Mendes 1,3,4, Leonardo Azevedo 2, Jo ˜ao Borges de Sousa 1,3
1 Laborat´orio de Sistemas e Tecnologia Subaqu ´atica (LSTS), Faculdade de Engenharia da Universidade do Porto, Portugal
2 Centro de Recursos Naturais e Ambiente (CERENA), Instituto Superior T ´ecnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
3 Laborat´orio Associado de Energia, Transportes e Aeron ´autica (LAETA), Porto, Portugal
4 +ATLANTIC CoLAB, Lisboa, Portugal
Abstract—Ocean models’ forecasting capabilities heavily de-
pend on the quality of assimilated data. Autonomous Underwater
Vehicles (AUVs) are increasingly used to collect data more quickly
and cost-effectively, but their endurance limitations make efﬁcient
trajectory planning essential to maximize data informativeness.
This work presents a cost-effective, multi-vehicle path planning
algorithm for adaptive ocean sampling, based on the Prize-
Collecting Vehicle Routing Problem (PCVRP) and designed to
close the loop between model prediction and assimilation by
guiding data collection in data-sensitive regions. The algorithm
ensures compliance with key practical constraints typical of real-
world missions, including different endurance capabilities of the
vehicles, varying deployment and recovery locations, and obstacle
avoidance within the operational area. The approach follows
a daily cycle: the ocean model generates a one-day forecast,
producing a spatial uncertainty map that serves as input to the
planning algorithm; the algorithm determines the near-optimal
sampling allocations for the vehicles, aiming to maximize the
collected information and minimize the travelled distance; ﬁnally,
the collected data are assimilated to improve the next forecast.
The methodology has been tested and validated on a ﬂeet of
AUVs in Nazar ´e, Portugal, within the context of the FRESNEL
ﬁeld campaign conducted in October 2024. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methodology in
real-world contexts and the beneﬁts of the adaptive sampling
strategy in enhancing model capabilities.
Index Terms—Adaptive sampling, autonomous underwater
vehicle (AUV), ocean modeling, vehicle routing problem (VRP).
I. I NTRODUCTION
Ocean models are essential tools for predicting the future
state of the oceans, which is critical for climate forecasting,
pollution monitoring, and resource management. However,
the inherent imperfections of these models make the data
assimilation process vital for compensating for model errors
and improving their forecast capabilities. This is achieved
by integrating real-world observational data with the physical
model, resulting in a more accurate representation of the sys-
tem’s state [1]. Diverse technologies are used to collect these
data. Satellite data, while highly advantageous for providing
data of vast areas, are subject to low spatial resolution and
depend on atmospheric conditions. On the other hand, in situ
measurements, such as those obtained using ships or buoys,
provide more accurate datasets for ocean models. Still, they
face limitations in terms of operational cost and the area they
can cover, thus limiting the data to point-based measurements
in speciﬁc locations. Recent developments in technology
and automation have made Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
(AUVs) an efﬁcient tool for data collection. These vehicles,
equipped with different sensors and the ability to move, can
improve both the spatial and temporal resolution of a wide
range of oceanographic data [2]. However, the endurance lim-
itations of these vehicles make intelligent trajectory planning
crucial for focusing on areas of greater relevance for ongoing
analysis. Moreover, the high variability of ocean dynamics and
the inﬂux of assimilated data necessitate continually reﬁning
sampling strategies to adapt to changing conditions. This opens
the door to adaptive sampling strategies, where the goal is to
predict the types and locations of observations expected to be
most useful based on given objectives and the constraints of
the available assets [3]. The objectives, targets, and platforms
involved in adaptive sampling strategies vary widely, leading
to several approaches tailored to speciﬁc applications in the
context of AUVs [4]. These include, among others, seabed
coverage for mine countermeasures [5], sampling for water
mass classiﬁcation [6], tracking coastal upwelling and river
plume fronts [7], [8] and ocean phenomena [9], [10]. In [11],
a Gaussian Process-based adaptive sampling method for a
single AUV is introduced to explore an environment while
prioritizing the most informative regions, deﬁned by different
potential applications. In [12], a recursive-greedy algorithm is
employed to sample the operational area while considering
vehicle endurance constraints and high-trafﬁc zones. Both
studies focus on single-vehicle scenarios, and a prior deﬁnition
of waypoints, in number or location, is used for trajectory plan-
ning. A multi-vehicle approach is explored in [13], presenting
an adaptive sampling strategy for multiple AUVs that utilizes
virtual bodies and artiﬁcial potentials. This method focuses on
cooperative control, with multiple vehicles maintaining forma-
tion while sampling the ocean, as tested during the OASN II
project [14]. A promising adaptive sampling technique driven
by an ocean model is proposed in [15], intending to minimize
the error standard deviation of a 2D ocean ﬁeld to improve
ocean predictions using Mixed Integer Linear Programming
(MILP). Given the initial deployment positions and the desired
2025 Symposium on Maritime Informatics and Robotics (MARIS) | 979-8-3315-1310-8/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/MARIS64137.2025.11139688
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO PORTO. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 11:46:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
trajectory lengths for the vehicles, the method provides an
optimal solution that accounts for multiple operational con-
straints. While the reported computation times for simulations
are promising, the solution time increases exponentially with
the desired trajectory length, making the approach sensitive
to the problem’s scale. Despite these advancements, many
proposed approaches struggle to address the complexities of
real-world deployments, where operational areas vary in size
and characteristics. This variability often results in computa-
tional challenges and the introduction of essential operational
constraints, limiting the effectiveness of existing methods. To
address these gaps, this work proposes an operational approach
for adaptive sampling designed for real-world applications
to close the loop between forecasting and data assimilation
to enhance the predictive capabilities of ocean models. Our
approach introduces a cost-effective algorithm for computing
near-optimal AUV trajectories, accommodating varying ﬂeet
sizes while addressing key practical constraints typical of real-
world missions. These constraints include different endurance
limitations for each vehicle, distinct deployment and recovery
locations, known obstacles within the operational area, and
the time required by the AUVs to ensure communication and
navigation ﬁxes during the missions.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II details the
problem under investigation. Section III introduces the key
steps of the proposed approach. Section IV describes the
experimental activities conducted in both simulation and real-
world scenarios and the obtained results. Finally, Section V
summarizes the ﬁndings and explores potential future devel-
opments.
II. P ROBLEM STATEMENT
In this work, we focus on enhancing the capabilities
of numerical ocean models by leveraging AUVs to collect
oceanographic data. The goal is to implement an adaptive
sampling strategy that maximizes the informativeness of the
data collected by AUVs, enhancing the accuracy of the model’s
predictions through data assimilation. This will ultimately
lead to better-informed AUV missions, closing the data loop
illustrated in Fig. 1, and consisting of three fundamental steps
iteratively executed on a daily basis:
1) Model output: A daily one-step forecast ˆθ(k + 1,x,y )
of an oceanic variable θ and its associated uncertainty σˆθ(k +
1,x,y ) is computed by the model, where k is the current
day and x and y correspond to longitude and latitude values.
The outputs of this model are presented as discrete spatial
maps,Mˆθ(x,y ) andMσ ˆθ (x,y ), covering the geographical
area under study, and consisting of gridded representations
where each grid cell corresponds to a speciﬁc geographic
location (x,y ), with values indicating the respective output
under consideration.
2) Adaptive sampling algorithm: Given as input the spatial
map corresponding to the uncertainty associated with the one-
day predictionMσ ˆθ (x,y ) and a ﬂeet of N vehicles equipped
with sensors capable of point-wise sampling the environmental
quantity θ, the objective is to determine the set of vehicle
trajectories for the following day, as a series of waypoints,
that maximize the accumulated uncertainty along the paths
while adhering to the operational constraints of the vehicles.
3) Data assimilation: At the end of the day, the measure-
ments collected along the vehicle trajectories are assimilated
into the model and a new forecast 1) is generated.
Fig. 1. Data loop closure: (1) model output generation - Mσ ˆθ (x,y )
uncertainty map associated with the one-day forecast of an oceanic variable
θ; (2) adaptive sampling - optimization of vehicle trajectories to maximize
uncertainty collection; and (3) data assimilation - integration of vehicle
measurements into the model.
Concerning the adaptive sampling algorithm, the problem
can be generalized and formally stated as follows:
T = max
N∑
i=1
Li∑
j=0
MI (xij,yij) (1)
Given a discrete spatial mapMI (x,y ) containing information
I related to a variable, the objective is to generate a set of
trajectoriesT = {T1,...,T N}, where N is the number of
vehicles, aimed at maximizing the total informationI collected
along the paths of length Li.
In this formulation, (xij,yij) represents the coordinates of
the j−th point along the trajectory of the i−th vehicle.
In contrast, MI (x,y ) can be interpreted in different ways
according to the speciﬁc objectives of the problem. However,
in our case, it corresponds to the spatial map containing
the uncertainty values associated with the one-day forecast,
Mσ ˆθ (x,y ).
In order to make the problem relevant from an application per-
spective, it is subject to the following operational constraints:
• Each trajectory has a maximum length Lmaxi, deter-
mined by the mission’s endurance capacity of each vehi-
cle:
Li≤Lmaxi =vi×Tmaxi(vi) ∀i (2)
Wherevi represents the desired vehicle’s velocity for the
mission and Tmaxi represents the maximum operational
time achievable at that velocity.
• The starting and ending locations of the trajectories differ
for each vehicle, providing ﬂexibility in the choice of
deployment and recovery locations:
(xi0,yi0)̸= (xiLi,yiLi) ∀i (3)
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO PORTO. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 11:46:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
The introduction of this constraint also allows for plan-
ning trajectories over multiple days, with the vehicle’s
position at the time of the next planning session serving
as the starting point.
• The trajectories must avoid static obstacles within the
operational area to prevent collisions with potentially
hazardous elements such as rocks, shallow water, nets,
or unknown objects:
[(xij,yij), (xi(j+1),yi(j+1))] /∈O ∀i,∀j (4)
WhereO is the region within the operational area oc-
cupied by obstacles, which is assumed to be known a
priori.
• The vehicles can spend an optional time, twp, at each
waypoint along the trajectory for communication and
navigation correction purposes.
III. A DAPTIVE SAMPLING PLANNER
Fig. 2. Workﬂow of the adaptive sampling algorithm developed by the
authors: The input map MI (x,y ) undergoes obstacle mapping and ﬁltering;
The map is transformed into a weighted graph, where grid cells serve as
nodes representing potential waypoints, with assigned rewards; The PCVRP
is solved to generate near-optimal trajectories.
To solve the described problem, we propose a method based
on graph optimization. The challenge of ﬁnding the N trajec-
tories that maximize the collected information in MI (x,y )
while adhering to the operational constraints is decomposed
into three main steps, shown in Fig. 2, and summarized below:
• A pre-processing step is applied to the input map for
ﬁltering and obstacle mapping.
• By adopting a points-of-interest selection procedure, the
spatial map MI (x,y ) is transformed into a weighted
graph, where grid cells serve as nodes representing po-
tential waypoints for the vehicle trajectories. The node
weights deﬁne the reward of visiting a speciﬁc node,
while the edge weights represent the cost of traveling
between nodes.
• We solve the Prize Collecting Vehicle Routing Problem
(PCVRP) [16] to determine how to connect the selected
nodes to generate the desired trajectories, maximizing
the reward and minimizing the travelled distance while
adhering to the operational constraints.
In the following paragraphs, the three steps are explained in
detail.
A. Pre-processing
The safety of vehicles is a priority when executing a
mission. Since the operational area is rarely free of obstacles,
their identiﬁcation is crucial for safe navigation and mission
success. These obstacles can vary in geometry and nature and
can be subject to temporal variations:
• Morphological obstacles include natural elements such as
landmasses, intertidal zones and submerged or emergent
rocks.
• Anthropogenic obstacles may include ﬁshing nets, which
can easily entangle vehicles, and high-trafﬁc maritime
zones where the risk of collisions is considerably high.
The ﬁrst step of the algorithm involves identifying these obsta-
cles by utilizing satellite imagery, bathymetric data, maritime
trafﬁc ﬂow analysis, and information gathered from local
sources. Upon identiﬁcation, the obstacles are masked on the
map provided as input to the algorithm by assigning a null
value to any grid cell that intersects with the obstacle, even
partially, enabling a complete and safe representation of the
locations of the obstacles and the free space for navigation.
Although the mentioned obstacles can be subject to temporal
variability, this was not considered in our approach.
The pre-processing step also includes ﬁltering the input map.
A Gaussian ﬁlter is applied to smooth the map while preserv-
ing its main features. The standard deviation along the x and
y axes is kept as a tunable parameter of the ﬁlter, deﬁned
according to the speciﬁc characteristics of the input map.
B. Graph Generation
The second step of the algorithm involves the generation
of the weighted graph G(V,E,W v,We) from the input map
MI (x,y ), where V is the set of nodes, E is the set of edges,
andWv andWe represent the weights of the nodes and edges,
respectively. The ﬁrst goal of this phase is to identify key
points within the map corresponding to potential waypoints,
which will serve as nodes of the graph on which optimal
planning will subsequently be performed. What criteria should
be used to select the nodes? The ﬁrst intuition might be to
consider every central point of each grid cell. However, this
would result in an excessively large graph, increasing the
computational time required to ﬁnd a solution and potentially
making the problem unsolvable for large areas. Another pos-
sible approach could be to select only a certain number of
the most informative points on the map, thus constraining the
planning to the most uncertain areas. However, this method
could select zones far from the desired vehicle deployment
locations, resulting in signiﬁcant energy consumption to reach
those areas.
Therefore, it is important to select the nodes in a way that
ensures good area coverage while keeping their number limited
to ensure the scalability of the proposed method for different
operational areas. The proposed solution combines contour
lines and V oronoi diagrams for selecting the graph nodes, as
shown in Fig. 3.
Contour lines - By applying contour lines to the spatial
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO PORTO. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 11:46:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
Fig. 3. Nodes selection: Contour lines and set of initial nodes V1 (black) -
V oronoi diagram applied to V1 and V oronoi vertices V2 (blue).
map, it is possible to identify the spatial distribution of
the uncertainty ﬁeld. These patterns serve as the basis for
generating the initial set of graph nodes V1. Once the contour
lines are deﬁned, each point along the curves is approximated
to the center of the nearest grid cell. Graph nodes are then
selected from these points, ensuring a minimum distance
dmin is maintained between adjacent nodes. This approach
allows us to keep the number of nodes manageable while
accurately representing the contour lines. Therefore, each point
pi belonging to the set of contour lines C is included in the
node set V1, if it satisﬁes the following condition:
d(pi,pk)≥dmin ∀pk∈V1, ∀pi∈C (5)
Voronoi diagrams - Contour lines can take on highly varied
shapes. V oronoi diagrams are employed subsequently to ensure
better coverage and guarantee the presence of nodes even
within the areas enclosed by the level curves. Starting with
a set of generator points, the V oronoi diagram is a partition of
the plane into cells, where each cell contains all the points
closer to a speciﬁc generator than any other. The vertices
of the V oronoi diagram, on the other hand, are the points
where the edges of at least three V oronoi cells meet. In other
words, a V oronoi vertex is a point equidistant from three
or more generators. For this reason, these vertices are ideal
candidates for enhancing coverage within the areas inside the
level curves. Considering the set of nodes V1 as generator
nodes, the V oronoi diagrams are computed, and a new set of
nodes V2 is deﬁned from the vertices of the diagram. Also in
this case, the condition expressed in equation (5) is applied and
only the vertices that maintain a minimum distance dmin from
the already selected graph nodes and the generated vertices
will be added to the new set V2.
The result of this phase is a graph in which the nodes (V1∪V2)
serve as candidate waypoints for trajectory planning. The
deﬁnition of the weights for the nodes and edges is closely
related to the trajectory optimization and will be detailed in
the following subsection.
C. Prize-Collecting Vehicle Routing Problem
This step aims to determine how to connect the selected
nodes to form the N trajectories that maximize the collected
information while respecting the operational constraints. This
problem belongs to the broader family of Vehicle Routing
Problems (VRP) [21], a popular class of combinatorial op-
timization problems, generalization of the Traveling Salesman
Problem (TSP) to the multi-vehicle case. The VRP’s objective
is to determine the optimal set of routes to be performed by
a ﬂeet of vehicles to serve a given set of customers. The
route set is optimal if it meets all customer requirements
and operational constraints while minimizing the total travel
cost. This cost can be measured in economic terms, distance
traveled, or other factors, depending on the speciﬁc context
of the application. In particular, the problem addressed in
this work is formulated with the Prize Collecting Vehicle
Routing Problem (PCVRP) variant [16]. In this variant, it is not
mandatory to visit all customers, and each customer has a prize
that is collected when the customer is visited. The goal is to
balance the competing goals of minimizing travel costs while
maximizing the collected prizes and satisfying the operational
constraints. To formulate our problem as a PCVRP we deﬁne
the customers as the identiﬁed graph nodes, the travel costs
as the cumulative distance between the nodes of the routes,
and the rewards for visiting each customer, based on nodes’
respective uncertainty values deﬁned by the input map. The
problem is, therefore, formulated as follows:
Given R, the set of non-empty routes and V , the set of
nodes, each route r∈R is deﬁned as a sequence of nodes
Vr∈V with a speciﬁc starting and ending point. The objective
function to be minimized is given by:
J = min(
∑
r∈R
dr +
∑
i∈V
pi−
∑
r∈R
∑
i∈Vr
pi) (6)
Where the ﬁrst term is related to the total distance of each
route dr, while the second and third terms together represent
the uncollected prizes of unvisited nodes, with pi the prize
associated with each node. The operational requirement (2)
on the maximum distance Lmaxi traveled by each vehicle is
introduced by adding a penalty term to the cost function:
λ· max(0,dr−Lmaxi ) (7)
In this way, if a route’s distance exceeds the limit, its cost
increases signiﬁcantly by the penalty coefﬁcient λ, discour-
aging such solutions. The process of assigning distance costs
and prizes is translated into weighting the edges and nodes of
the graph, as explained below.
Weights assignment - Edge weights are used to deﬁne
the cost of the path between two nodes. Assuming we are
operating in areas of sufﬁciently small size such that the
curvature of the Earth can be neglected without signiﬁcant
errors, the distance between nodes is calculated using the
Euclidean distance. However, to meet the operational require-
ment (4) outlined in the problem deﬁnition, which aims to
ensure obstacle-free trajectories, this distance is set to inﬁnity
if the line connecting two nodes intersects an obstacle. This
approach drastically increases the cost function (6), effectively
guiding the optimization towards obstacle-free trajectories.
The weights of the edges are assigned as follows:
We(eij) = dij ∀i,j ∈G (V ) (8)
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO PORTO. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 11:46:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
where dij =
{√
(xi−xj)2 + (yi−yj)2 if IJ /∈O,
∞ if IJ∈O
(9)
Node weight represents the reward pi obtained by visiting a
speciﬁc node and is evaluated to determine which nodes are
worth visiting and which should be avoided. Therefore, given
the goal of maximizing information, the reward associated
with a node at coordinates (xk,yk) is assigned proportionally
to the uncertainty value of that node, I(xk,yk), as identiﬁed
by the spatial map in input:
Wv(vk)∝I(xk,yk) ∀k∈G (V ) (10)
Finally, the constraint regarding the time twp that the vehicles
need to spend at each waypoint is considered by solving
the optimization problem twice. Since the total time Twp
each vehicle will spend at the waypoints during the mission
depends on the number of waypoints on the route, the ﬁrst
time, the problem is solved just to estimate this number. The
second time, the ﬁnal optimization is obtained considering the
maximum operational time Tmax in (2), subtracted by the
estimated total time spent at the waypoints, Twp.
Solver - VRP problems are known to have NP-hard com-
plexity, meaning that ﬁnding an optimal solution for large
instances becomes infeasible due to the exponential growth
of the computation time needed to solve them. Numerous
heuristics and metaheuristics methods have been developed
to obtain sub-optimal solutions. In this work, we use the
VRP solver PyVRP [20], which provides a high-performance
implementation of the Hybrid Genetic Search (HGS) algorithm
presented in [17].
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present the experimental activities carried
out. First, a simulation testing phase was conducted using
data from an ocean model to evaluate the algorithm’s fea-
sibility under varying conditions, including mission duration,
ﬂeet size, obstacles, and deployment and recovery positions.
Subsequently, the approach was tested and validated in a
real-world context during the FRESNEL (Field expeRiments
for modEling, aSsimilatioN, and adaptive sampLing) ﬁeld
campaign, where the full loop closure, presented in Section
II, was implemented daily.
A. Simulation
The scenario used to test the algorithm is based on the
Harvard Ocean Prediction System (HOPS) model [18] for the
Set´ubal Bay, south of Lisbon, Portugal. That scenario used a
similar model implementation that was then applied for the
FRESNEL ﬁeld campaign [19].
This model implementation presents a grid spatial resolution
of 700m. The temperature forecast error ﬁeld, normalized
by the variable’s variance within the domain, serves as the
spatial map, MI (x,y ), for testing the algorithm. From this
map, several sub-areas were selected to assess the algorithm’s
performance in operational regions with varying morphologi-
cal characteristics and different error patterns. Some examples
of these tests are presented below. For each simulation, the
standard deviation values σx =σy = 1 were used for ﬁltering
the input map, while the dmin value was selected from an
operational perspective to have a minimum distance between
waypoints equal to 1km for simulation a) and b) and 2km
for simulation c). Land masses, along with ﬁctitious objects,
were mapped as obstacles. The mission parameters provided
TABLE I
INPUT ALGORITHM - D ESIRED MISSION PARAMETERS
Fleet size Speed [m/s] Duration [h]
a) 2 AUVs 1 16 - 10
b) 3 AUVs 1 15 - 21 - 9
c) 1 AUV 1.2 12
as input to the algorithm, selectable based on each mission’s
speciﬁc needs and requirements, are reported in Table I. The
resulting trajectories, generated by the algorithm, and their
speciﬁcations are presented in Fig. 4. The simulations were
conducted considering different deployment and recovery loca-
tions for each vehicle. These were not reported in the table but
in the images below, with stars indicating the starting points.
The x and y axes indicate grid cell indices, with a resolution
of 700m per cell, while the value of each cell represents the
temperature forecast error ﬁeld eT . As shown in Fig. 4, the
generated trajectories head towards areas with greater error,
aiming to maximize the collected values while adhering to the
desired mission durations. Indeed, the results show a deviation
of approximately 10 minutes from the target duration across all
missions. To effectively compare the desired duration with that
of the generated trajectories, the time spent at each waypoint,
twp, was set to zero in these simulations. In simulations a) and
b), trajectories avoiding the mapped morphological obstacles
can be observed. To further evaluate the algorithm’s ability
to generate obstacle-free trajectories, ﬁctitious obstacles were
introduced in the center of the operational area, as shown in
simulationc). These obstacles are handled as described in (9),
and the results conﬁrm the effectiveness of the algorithm in
generating obstacle-free trajectories.
The hardware exploited to produce the results is an Intel®
Core™ i7-1065G7 CPU @ 1.30GHz with 16GB of RAM.
Table II presents the number of nodes and the computational
costs of the algorithm for each simulation, with the PyVRP
Solver conﬁgured to stop after 20 iterations without improve-
ment in the best solution, as this value provides a good balance
between solution quality and computation time for the speciﬁc
case study. However, different values can be used to achieve
shorter computation times.
TABLE II
SIMULATION COMPUTATIONAL TIMES
a b c
Nodes 219 235 132
Time [s] 81 125 22
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO PORTO. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 11:46:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
Fig. 4. Adaptive sampling algorithm results: a) 2 AUVs – 1 [m/s] speed – 15[h] 53[min], 9[h] 48[min] mission durations – 17.84 [°C] total reward; b) 3
AUVs – 1 [m/s] speed – 20[h] 53[min], 14[h] 51[min], 8[h] 52[min] mission durations – 28.92 [°C] total reward; c) 1 AUV – 1.2 [m/s] speed – 11[h] 53[min]
mission duration – 20.06 [°C] total reward.
B. FRESNEL ﬁeld campaign
The proposed approach was tested and validated in a real-
world context during the FRESNEL ﬁeld campaign. The goal
of the campaign was to close the observe-assimilate-predict-
sample loop by demonstrating the applicability of adaptively
controlled marine robots in sampling the water column, driven
by ocean models with increasing predictive skill. The experi-
mental campaign took place in the Nazar ´e area (Portugal), in
October 2024 and for two weeks, it involved the deployment of
multiple assets to collect oceanographic data, including AUVs,
an oceanographic vessel, and gliders.
Asset - The asset deployed for the adaptive sampling
strategy presented in this work consisted of a ﬂeet of 3
Light Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (LAUVs), Fig. 5,
supported by the open-source LSTS software toolchain devel-
oped by the Laborat´orio de Sistemas e Tecnologia Subaqu´atica
(LSTS) [22]. The toolchain comprises three key components:
DUNE, the onboard vehicle software responsible for naviga-
tion, control, and communications; NEPTUS, the command
and control software used for mission execution and analysis;
and RIPPLES, the web infrastructure designed to enhance
situational awareness, facilitate communication, and provide
a shared operational overview for all participants in the ﬁeld
campaign. Finally, IMC [23], the communication protocol used
for exchanging information between vehicles and sensors.
The vehicles were equipped with CTD (Conductivity, Tem-
perature, and Depth) sensors to sample the water column
throughout the mission, while the communication sensor suite
included an Iridium modem for satellite communication, as
well as WiFi, GSM, and acoustic modems.
Fig. 5. FRESNEL ﬁeld campaign: LAUVs-Xplore during deployment oper-
ations and mission execution.
Models - The planner was tested using two different models
for the assimilation and prediction of ocean variables. A
numerical model (NM) based on the HOPS model implemen-
tation in the Nazar´e Canyon area of inﬂuence [19], was conﬁg-
ured to cover the area from 8.9 °W to 10 °W and from 39.2 °N
to 39.9 °N, with a horizontal grid cell resolution of 300m in
both latitude and longitude and a vertical discretization based
on 30 double-sigma vertical levels.
Additionally, a statistical model (SM) [25], which leveraged
14 days prior information, Copernicus Marine Environment
Monitoring Service (CMEMS) products [27], and Direct Se-
quential Simulation [26], was used to spatially predict ocean
variables for the following day. The model covered an area
from 11.75 °W to 8.43 °W and from 39 °N to 41.16 °N with
a horizontal cell resolution of 7km in latitude and 9km in
longitude, while a vertical discretization based on 17 levels at
constant depth.
Operational Setup - A sub-area of the model grids, cen-
tered on the Nazar ´e Canyon and shown in blue in Fig. 6,
was selected for LAUVs operations. Following an analysis
of maritime trafﬁc density using AIS data from October, the
orange area, covering approximately 67.4km2, was identiﬁed
as a low trafﬁc zone and therefore designated as the opera-
tional area for adaptive sampling missions for safety reasons.
Meanwhile, the purple area, closer to the coast, was used for
deployment and recovery procedures. In accordance with the
Fig. 6. Snapshot from Ripples showing AIS data density for the month of
October in the study area (blue) along with the operational area for adaptive
sampling (orange) and the deployment and recovery area (purple).
3D characteristics of the models and in order to collect data
throughout the water column, the movement of the AUVs
along the algorithm-generated trajectories was deﬁned as a
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO PORTO. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 11:46:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
’yo-yo’, varying its depth between the surface and a safe depth
while reaching each mission waypoint.
The procedure followed to execute the missions is presented
in Fig. 7. Once a new one-step forecast became available,
the adaptive planning algorithm was executed to generate the
missions for the next day; the plans were transferred to Ripples
and transmitted via satellite to the vehicles; CTD proﬁles
were collected during the missions and, upon the vehicles’
recovery, the data were assimilated into the models, enabling
the generation of a new forecast.
Fig. 7. Operational workﬂow for mission execution.
Adaptive Sampling Planner - The spatial maps MI (x,y )
selected as input for the planner consisted of the temperature
forecast error ﬁeld (from HOPS) and the temperature forecast
standard deviation ﬁeld (from SM). To account for the 3D
characteristics of the models, the 2D map used as input to
the algorithm was derived by computing, for each cell of the
plane, the average error/uncertainty value across the depth
levels actually covered during the vehicle’s mission. Since
the planning was constrained to the operational area described
above, and no other obstacles were present, the ability of the
algorithm to account for obstacles was exploited by deﬁning
an artiﬁcial barrier within which the planning was conﬁned.
A value of σx = σy = 1 was used for the Gaussian ﬁlter
applied to the NM map, while a value of σx = σy = 3 was
applied to the SM map after performing an interpolation to
achieve the same cell resolution as the NM. For all missions,
a minimum waypoint distance ofdmin = 1km was selected to
ensure sufﬁcient space for the vehicle to perform yo-yo motion
between waypoints and a time twp = 1 min was requested to
be spent at each waypoint for communication and navigation
ﬁx purposes. The remaining algorithm input parameters used
to generate missions according to the desired speciﬁcations
are reported in Table III for each day.
TABLE III
INPUT ALGORITHM - D ESIRED MISSION PARAMETERS
Mission Date Fleet size Speed [m/s] Duration [h]
24/10/2024 1 AUV 1 5
29/10/2024 2 AUVs 1 6 - 6
30/10/2024 2 AUVs 1 10 - 10
31/10/2024 1 AUV 0.9 16
In Fig. 8, the corresponding trajectories generated by the
algorithm and their speciﬁcations are shown. Both the x and
y axes indicate grid cell indices, with a resolution of 300 m
per cell, while the value of each cell represents either the
temperature forecast error ﬁeld eT or the temperature forecast
standard deviation ﬁeld σT on the day of the mission. The al-
gorithm successfully generated missions that met the required
timeframes, with the reported durations also including the
total time spent at each waypoint of the routes. To minimize
computational time, the estimation of the number of waypoints
was conducted by setting a ﬁxed solver stop time of 60 s,
while the second optimization followed the same stop criteria
as in the simulation case. On the 24th and 29th, where the
mission duration was more limited, the algorithm’s ability to
generate trajectories driven by the uncertainty values becomes
particularly evident.
An example of the temperature values collected during the
mission on the 24th by the onboard CTD sensor is shown
in Fig. 9, where the characteristic yo-yo motion performed by
the vehicle throughout the mission can also be observed. These
data represented the input for the assimilation process. Analy-
ses were conducted to assess the beneﬁts of AUV temperature
data assimilation in enhancing the model’s forecasting ability.
Speciﬁcally, we examined the one-step predictions made by
the SM model regarding the temperature values for the 30th
at various depth levels, both with and without the assimilation
of data collected during the LAUV mission on the 29th.
By comparing these two predictions with the actual values
collected by the LAUV on the 30th, an RMSE of 0.6752
resulted for the case without assimilation, while the case
with assimilation yielded an RMSE of 0.4012, highlighting
the effectiveness of this approach in improving the model’s
forecasting capability.
V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
This work introduces a multi-vehicle path planning algo-
rithm for adaptive ocean sampling based on PCVRP, aimed
at maximizing the informativeness of the data collected by
AUVs, with the goal of enhancing the accuracy of ocean model
predictions through the data assimilation process, ultimately
closing the loop between assimilation and prediction. The pro-
posed approach was tested in both simulations and real-world
deployments. The results demonstrate the algorithm’s ability to
generate sub-optimal trajectories that maximize the collected
uncertainty values along the paths in a cost-effective manner
for different operational scenarios. It has proven effective
for ﬂeets of varying sizes, accommodating different desired
deployment and recovery positions while ensuring compliance
with each vehicle’s endurance speciﬁcations. Additionally,
the algorithm is applicable in operational areas that contain
obstacles, ensuring the generation of collision-free trajectories.
Although the study included real-world deployments, logistical
constraints and inherent risks limited the number of tests
conducted and the number of consecutive assimilation days.
Future developments will focus on extending this approach to
account for the three-dimensional nature of ocean models, gen-
erating trajectories in three-dimensional space. Furthermore,
given the algorithm’s promising computational efﬁciency, it
will be adapted for online use on the vehicles, enabling
near real-time data exchange between the vehicle and the
model. Re-planning trajectories throughout the mission as
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO PORTO. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 11:46:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
Fig. 8. Adaptive sampling algorithm results: 24/10) 1 AUV – 1 [m/s] speed – 4[h] 53[min] mission duration – 17 [km] planar traveled distance; 29/10) 2
AUVs – 1 [m/s] speed – 5[h] 42[min], 5[h] 53[min] mission durations – 19.95 [km], 20.40 [km] planar traveled distances; 30/10) 2 AUVs – 1 [m/s] speed –
9[h] 24[min], 9[h] 32[min] mission durations – 32.48[km], 33.23 [km] planar traveled distances; 31/10) 1 AUV – 0.9 [m/s] speed – 15[h] 45[min] mission
duration – 49.21 [km] planar traveled distance.
Fig. 9. LAUV Xplore trajectory (left) and temperature data collected during
the mission (right).
new predictions become available will allow for taking into
account ocean variability during the sampling activities. In this
context, the dynamic nature of the real environment will also
be addressed, including the incorporation of dynamic obstacles
to ensure vehicle safety throughout the mission.
VI. A CKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by FRESNEL project, funded
by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research (ONR) under ONR award
number N00014-22-1-2796, as well as SMART (diStributed
AI systeM for mArine plastic debRis moniToring) project,
funded by the Portuguese Space Agency in the framework
program for research and innovation. The work was also
supported by JUNO—Robotic Exploration of Atlantic Waters
project—Refª 2021/0008—from FLAD and by the DiverSea
project, supported by the European Commission under grant
agreement 101082004.
REFERENCES
[1] Anderson DL, Sheinbaum J, Haines K., ”Data assimilation in ocean
models,” Reports on Progress in Physics, 1996 Oct.
[2] Wynn RB, et al. ”Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs): Their
past, present and future contributions to the advancement of marine
geoscience,” Marine geology, 2014 Jun.
[3] Lermusiaux PF. ”Adaptive modeling, adaptive data assimilation and
adaptive sampling,” Physica D, 230(1-2):172-96, 2007 Jun.
[4] Hwang J, Bose N, Fan S. ”AUV adaptive sampling methods: A review,”
Applied Sciences,9(15):3145, 2019 Aug.
[5] Paull L, Saeedi S, Seto M, Li H. ”Sensor-driven online coverage plan-
ning for autonomous underwater vehicles,” IEEE/ASME Transactions
on Mechatronics, 18(6):1827-38, 2012 Sep.
[6] Ge Y , Eidsvik J, Mo-Bjørkelund T, ”3-D adaptive AUV sampling for
classiﬁcation of water masses,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering,
48(3):626-39, 2023 Apr.
[7] Zhang Y , Godin MA, Bellingham JG, Ryan JP, ”Using an autonomous
underwater vehicle to track a coastal upwelling front,” IEEE Journal of
Oceanic Engineering, 37(3):338-47, 2012 Jun.
[8] Teixeira D, de Sousa JB, Mendes R, Fonseca J,”3D Tracking of a River
Plume Front with an AUV ,” OCEANS 2021: San Diego–Porto, 2021.
[9] Costa, Maria Joao, et al., ”Field report: Exploring fronts with multiple
robots,” IEEE/OES Autonomous Underwater Vehicle Workshop, 2018.
[10] Pinto, Jose, et al,”Coordinated robotic exploration of dynamic open
ocean phenomena,” Field Robotics, 2, 843-871, 2022.
[11] Stankiewicz P, Tan YT, Kobilarov M, ”Adaptive sampling with an
autonomous underwater vehicle in static marine environments,” Journal
of Field Robotics,38(4):572-97, 2021 Jun.
[12] Binney J, Krause A, Sukhatme GS, ”Informative path planning for
an autonomous underwater vehicle,” IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, pp. 4791-4796, 2010 May.
[13] Fiorelli E, Leonard NE, Bhatta P, Paley DA, Bachmayer R, Fratantoni
DM,”Multi-AUV control and adaptive sampling in Monterey Bay,”IEEE
journal of oceanic engineering,31(4):935-48, 2006 Oct.
[14] Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI), “Autonomous
Ocean Sampling Network II (AOSN II)” Collaborative Project, 2003.
[15] Yilmaz NK, Evangelinos C, Lermusiaux PF, Patrikalakis NM, ”Path
planning of autonomous underwater vehicles for adaptive sampling
using mixed integer linear programming,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic
Engineering,33(4):522-37,2008 Oct.
[16] Toth P, Vigo D, ”Vehicle routing: problems, methods, and applications,”
Society for industrial and applied mathematics; 2014 Nov.
[17] Vidal T, Crainic TG, Gendreau M, Prins C,”A hybrid genetic algorithm
with adaptive diversity management for a large class of vehicle routing
problems with time-windows,” Computers and operations research,
40(1):475–489, 2013.
[18] A.R. Robinson,”Physical Processes, Field estimation and Interdisci-
plinary Ocean Modeling,” Earth-Science Reviews, 40, 3-54, 1996.
[19] Vitorino J, Larangeiro S, Silva F, Pinto J, Almeida S, ”An operational
system for the forecasting of oceanographic conditions in the Nazare
Canyon area (W Portugal),” OCEANS’10 IEEE SYDNEY ,pp. 1-5, 2010.
[20] Wouda, N.A., L. Lan, and W. Kool, ”PyVRP: a high-performance VRP
solver package,” INFORMS Journal on Computing, pp. 943-955, 2024.
[21] Toth, P.; Vigo, D., eds.,”The Vehicle Routing Problem,” 2002.
[22] J. Pinto, P. S. Dias, R. Martins, J. Fortuna, E. Marques, and J. Sousa,
“The LSTS toolchain for networked vehicle systems,” OCEANS 2013
MTS/IEEE Bergen, pp.1-9, 2013 June.
[23] R. Martins, P. S. Dias, E. R. Marques, J. Pinto, J. B. Sousa, and F. L.
Pereira, “Imc: A communication protocol for networked vehicles and
sensors,” Oceans 2009-Europe, pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2009.
[24] Hwang, Jimin, Neil Bose, and Shuangshuang Fan., ”AUV Adaptive
Sampling Methods: A Review,” Applied Sciences 9, no. 15: 3145, 2019.
[25] A. F. Duarte, L. Bernacchi, R. Mendes, J. Sousa, L. Azevedo, ”Uncer-
tainty maps as a tool for efﬁcient AUV data collection,” submitted.
[26] A. Soares, “Direct sequential simulation and cosimulation,” Mathemat-
ical Geology, vol. 33, pp. 911–926, 2001.
[27] E.U. Copernicus Marine Service Information (CMEMS), “Atlantic-
Iberian Biscay Irish Ocean Physics Analysis and Forecast,” Marine Data
Store (MDS), Accessed: Oct. 14-25, 2024.
Authorized licensed use limited to: b-on: UNIVERSIDADE DO PORTO. Downloaded on April 04,2026 at 11:46:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 